# Integrated-Rock-Classification-Using-Supervised-and-Unsupervised-Machine-Learning
The Tuscaloosa Marine Shale (TMS) formation is a clay- and liquid-rich emerging shale play across central Louisiana and southwest Mississippi with recoverable resources of 1.5 billion barrels of oil and 4.6 trillion cubic feet of gas. The formation poses numerous challenges due to its high average clay content (50 wt%) and rapidly changing mineralogy, making the selection of fracturing candidates a difficult task. Reliable rock classification is the key to identifying target zones for successful hydraulic fracturing stimulation treatment. In this study, we propose the use of machine learning techniques for three rock classification schemes based on the rock classes, reservoir quality, and stress profile.
We trained ML models on a dataset containing conventional logs and rock classes for a well located in the Tuscaloosa Marine Shale. The latter were obtained from heterogeneous rock analysis (HRA), which is a well-log-based workflow whose reliability is assured by validating the results against the core observations. The anisotropic minimum horizontal stress log was obtained using an extension of the ANNIE method which handles the difference between the vertical and horizontal Poisson’s ratios by employing empirical correlations from ultrasonic core data for the stiffness coefficients C13 and C11. We also performed reservoir quality (RQ) and stress profile (SP) clustering, for which we used well-log-based estimates of the petrophysical (effective porosity, water saturation, oil, and water volume), geomechanical (minimum horizontal stress), and compositional (volume of kerogen, quartz, calcite, and clay) properties as inputs.
The rock classes were predicted using algorithms such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest, and Gradient Boosting. Overall, the algorithms had similar performance and showed an average accuracy score of 0.92 on the train set. The Random Forest was chosen to evaluate the test set and successfully predicted the rock classes with an accuracy score of 0.80. The K-Means algorithm organized the input data into 4 RQ clusters with the best rock cluster having an average effective porosity of 5.3 %, kerogen volume of 0.023, and clay volume of 0.39. The anisotropic stress values were also clustered in 4 groups where the groups with the lowest (80.9 MPa) and highest average stresses (97.2 MPa) corresponded to the fracture initiation and fracture containment zones, respectively.
This study presents the practical use of machine learning in the screening of fracturing candidates and the selection of fracturing intervals. The proposed integrated rock classification technique could represent a valuable tool for completion optimization, as well as for planning and executing hydraulic fracturing treatments in the Tuscaloosa Marine Shale.
